Pinscape Pico Notes
===================


XInput
------

XInput refers to our XBox Controller emulation, which allows the Pico
to emulate this type of controller for button and accelerometer
inputs.  This is an alternative to the HID gamepad interface, which we
can also provide.  Both interfaces (XInput and gamepad) can even be
used simultaneously if desired.  XInput is functionally very similar
to the HID gamepad interface, but it has a different API on the
Windows side, so some applications might work better with XInput and
some might work better with HID gamepads.  In addition, some people
who also have other physical controllers in their systems have
encountered application conflicts when Pinscape is acting as a
controller of the same type.  By providing both interface options, we
hope to give users enough flexibility that they can eliminate any
conflicts they encounter with applications or other controllers.  In
most cases, the regular gamepad interface should be all that's needed.

INSTALLING: In order to use XInput, you MUST go through a manual
device driver setup process on Windows.  Windows doesn't recognize the
Pinscape Pico device as an XBox controller even if XInput is enabled
on the Pinscape unit, because Pinscape uses its own USB identifiers
(VID/PID) rather than using Microsoft's proprietary identifiers.  The
Windows XBox driver appears to only work automatically when it
recognizes the Microsoft identifiers.  However, you can still tell
Windows to treat the device as an XBox controller - you just have to
do so explicitly.

1. Make sure the Pinscape unit is plugged into a USB port

2. Make sure that the Pinscape unit is configured to enable its XInput
interface

3. In Windows, go to Device Manager

4. Select menu View -> Devices by Type

5. In the tree, open Universal Serial Bus devices

6. Find PinscapePicoControl in the list and click on it

7. Select menu View -> Devices by Connection

8. The PinscapePicoDevice you selected a couple of steps ago should
still be selected, and it should be part of a sub-tree under the
heading "USB Composite Device".  You should also find an unknown
device under this subtree, with a little yellow warning icon next to
it.  That's the XBox controller emulation.  Double-click on it to
bring up its properties.

9. In the properties dialog, click the Driver tab

10. Click Update Driver

11. Click "Browse my computer for drivers"

12. Tick the "Include subfolders" box

13. Click "Let me pick from a list of available drivers"

14. Select "Xbox 360 Controller for Windows"

15. Click Next, and confirm any additional dialogs that come up (you
shouldn't have to fill in any more information; it should just be a
matter of confirming each step at this point)

WINDOWS 10/11 START MENU INTERFERENCE: On Windows 10 and 11, Windows
interprets XInput joystick motion on the left joystick as control
inputs to the Start menu and some other other system-level menus and
dialogs.  This can be a huge problem if you have the left joystick
mapped to accelerometer inputs, since the accelerometer picks up small
ambient vibrations that make the joystick move at least a little bit
almost all the time.  One solution is to assign the accelerometer to
the RIGHT joystick, which Windows seems to ignore.  That's workable as
long as the applications you're using will accept nudge input on the
right joystick.  Another possible fix, which apparently works on some
versions of Windows but not others, is to run RegEdit, and navigate to
this key:

HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE\SOFTWARE\Microsoft\Input\Settings\ControllerProcessor

Add a subkey called ControllerToVKMapping (if it's not already there),
then add a DWORD value, named "Enabled", with value set to 0.  This
fix doesn't work with the Windows 11 version I'm currently using, but
it reportedly does work for some versions.
